This order prescribes standard operating procedures for use by Air Traffic Control Specialists in the Cleveland ARTCC on the VATSIM network. Controllers are required to be familiar with the provisions of this order that pertain to their operational responsibilities and to exercise their best judgment if they encounter situations not covered herein. 

It is emphasized that information continued herein is designed specifically for use in the virtual controlling environment. It is not applicable, nor should be referenced for live operations in the National Airspace System (NAS). The procedures continued within this order document how the positions are to be operated and, in conjunction with FAA Order 7100.10, 7100.65, and 7210.3, will be the basis for performance evaluations, training, and certification. 

## Record Order of Changes

| Change # | Effective Date <br> (YYYY/MM/DD) | Operating Initials |
| -- | -- | -- |
| A | 2025/01/14 | EG |

## Explanation of Changes

REVISION A -
Initial writing

## Chapter 1: Administrative

### 1.1 Purpose
This order, in accordance with and supplementary to FAA Order 7110.65, establishes  
the procedures that are to be used for operating the positions within the Arnold-Palmer ATCT. The procedures contained within this order document how the positions are to be operated in conjunction with FAA Orders regarding evaluation, training, and certification. Controllers are required to be familiar with the provisions of this order that pertain to their operational responsibilities.

### 1.2 Distribution
This order is to be distributed to LBE ATCT personnel.

### 1.3 Cancellation
Minor Fields SOP Chapter 18 dated July 1, 2023 is hereby cancelled.

### 1.4 Explanation of Changes
The significant changes to this order are identified in the Record of Changes page(s).

### 1.5 Effective Date
This order is effective January 14, 2025.

### 1.6 Software Utilization
ZOB has standardized on the Consolidated Radar Client (CRC) as its operating software of choice. Any reference to software in this and other Facility Orders are written with CRC in mind. Controllers utilizing alternative VATSIM radar clients shall consult with ZOB Facility Engineer regarding the applicability of software settings to their client of choice.

## Chapter 2: General

### 2.1 Operational Positions
All controllers shall adhere to the following standard when signing onto a LBE position.

| Callsign | Position | Radio Name | ID | Frequency |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| LBE\_GND | Ground | Palmer Ground | GC | 121.800 |
| LBE\_TWR | Local | Palmer Tower | T | 125.000 |

### 2.2 Runway/Flow Procedures

1. LBE CIC (Combined with the local control position unless otherwise stated) is responsible for:  
   i.  Determining the active runway and the coordination of all opening/closing and/or changes to the active runway(s) with JST RAPCON **(CLE\_66 or any position overlying is to be used as a replacement for JST RAPCON).**  
   ii.  Reviewing and ensuring solicitation and distribution of PIREPs and pertinent hazardous weather that may affect aircraft safety.

### 2.3 General Procedures

1. LBE surface area of responsibility is defined as a 5 NM radius around LBE from surface up to and including 3700ft MSL.

### 2.4 Transfer of Position Responsibility

1.  All personnel shall review authorized sources of information prior to beginning the monitor, including the following:  
   i. Information Display System (IDS) found on the vZOB Site  
2.  All personnel shall use the position relief checklist provided on the IDS page and share equal responsibility for the completeness/accuracy of the briefing.  
3.  All personnel, after verbally providing the position relief briefing, shall remain on the position for a minimum of two (2) minutes and advise “monitor complete” once the time has elapsed.

### 2.5 Required Facility Procedures

1. Runway Use Program  
   i. The calm wind runway for Arnold-Palmer Regional Airport is RWY24.  
   ii. Use the runway most nearly aligned with the wind when 5 knots or more or the “calm wind” runway when less than 5 knots unless use of another runway will be operationally advantageous or is requested by the pilot.

## Chapter 3: Clearance Delivery

### 3.1 Position Responsibility

1. **This position is to be combined with GC, and only to be controlled:**   
       **i. As a pre-approved rostered position during an event.**  
       **ii. At the discretion of the ATM, DATM, or TA**  
2. CD must coordinate any route/altitude not in compliance with LOA routing.  
3. Receive and disseminate weather information.  
4. Prepare ATIS.  
5. Process miscellaneous flight data information.  
6. Accept requests for filing IFR flight plans.  
7. Process and distribute flight plan information.  
8. Issue clearance instructions.

### 3.2 Issue Clearances / Amendments / Instructions
CD shall issue ATC clearances to IFR and VFR Class D departures as followed:

1. **IFR Departures:**   
      i.  Assign *5000ft*   
      ii. Inform the aircraft to expect (requested altitude) 10 minutes after departure.  
2. **VFR Class D Departures:**   
      i. Determine destination/direction of flight and make note of requested altitude in flight strip.   
      ii. No initial altitude restrictions necessary unless otherwise coordinated.

### 3.3 Weather Information / ATIS

1. Receiving:   
      i. Local weather should be received via the ATC client or the Aviation Weather Center.   
      ii. CWAs, SIGMETs, AIRMETs, and NOTAMs should be received from the Aviation Weather Center and/or the FAA.  
2. Disseminating  
      i. CD shall ensure that all LC and TRACON/RAPCON positions receive the new ATIS code.   
      ii. CD shall notify CIC when weather changes from VFR to IFR or from IFR to VFR.

## Chapter 4: Ground Control

### 4.1 Ground Movement

1. GC is responsible for all movement areas not including runways.   
2. GC must monitor and use frequency 121.800.  
3. For intersection departures, the measured distances should be issued to any pilot who requests and all military aircraft—distances depicted in Chapter (TBD).  
4. GC shall give way to aircraft exiting runways unless otherwise coordinated.   
5. GC shall be made aware of local in-trail restrictions and as necessary: sequence traffic on taxiway to expedite departures.  
6. GC must protect the intersection of taxiways A and B for all aircraft that may use these movement areas to exit active runways.

### 4.2 Intra-Facility Coordination

1. Operational requests:  
   i. Before coordinating, ensure the request can be accepted by checking for traffic.  
   ii. Coordinate all intersection departures with LC.  
2. GC shall ensure to not allow aircraft to proceed on to a runway without transfer of control or approval from LC.  
3. GC shall coordinate with LC all requests for intersection departures.  
4. If non-standard runway departure is requested, GC shall coordinate with LC prior to taxi clearance.

## Chapter 5: Local Control

### 5.1 Position Responsibility

1. Separate aircraft within the lateral and vertical limits of LBE delegated airspace as defined in Section 2.3a.  
2. Ensure operations are conducted on active runways.  
3. LC must monitor and use frequency 125.000.  
4. LC will provide visual separation between aircraft when applicable.

### 5.2 Departure Procedures

1. LC shall coordinate with the appropriate radar sector (JST RAPCON or the appropriate replacement) for the release of all IFR departures.  
2. All VFR departures from LBE are automatically released.  
3. On departure, all IFR aircraft shall be assigned runway heading and 5000ft.  
4. The overlying controller may cancel any automatic release when necessary due to traffic.

### 5.4 Arrival Procedures

1. LC shall ensure arriving IFR aircraft are separated from any VFR aircraft.

### 5.5 Go Arounds and Missed Approaches

1. LC must advise the radar sector which will provide radar service to the aircraft executing a missed approach or go-around  
2. LC must assign the aircraft 5,000ft and may turn 20 degrees left or right of the centerline if required for separation, without coordination. The affected radar sector must be advised of this heading assignment prior to communication transfer.

### 5.6 Helicopter Operations
All movement areas are authorized for helicopter operations. When conducting helicopter operations LC shall coordinate with GC prior to issuing arrival/departure instructions to/from any location on the field other than active runways.  


